---
layout: post
title: Death Comes a Knockin'
subtitle: A Rattus Review by Andrew Glassop
bigimg: /img/post/rattus.jpg
---

The Black Death was a moral plague. It attacked all with an indiscriminate and fatal casualness. Originally seen as God's judgment on the world for its sin and avarice, it later became the world's judgment on us for our reckless population growth and use of natural resources. It killed around 50% (sources vary) of Europe’s population and lasted intermittently for hundreds of years.

In short, it is perfect fodder for a light family game.

Taking on the role of Feudal Kings across Europe, players attempt to fill the land with their people, whilst trying to protect them from the plague at the same time. As Europe fills with people, it also fills with rats and the plague, which visits regions dealing death and mayhem, in the shape of black figure with a monseigneur’s hat. Once all the rats have been used up the game ends and the winner is, naturally enough, the one with the most people left on the board.

## Components
Solid but unremarkable. Default little wooden cubes, good quality cardboard tokens and cards, and pleasant but hardly gorgeous graphics. The rule book is in full colour, and well written, but could have been a bit more darkly humourous in tone.

## Gameplay
In turn, players place their cubes on an area on the board, the number of cubes they place being limited by the number of rats already in that particular area. The more rats in the area, the more cubes they can place. In doing this they are helped by character cards (representing roles like Peasants, Witches, Knights and Merchants) that provide players with special powers. After a player places their cubes they move the plague from one area to an adjacent one, put some more rat tokens on the board, and then resolve the rat tokens for the area the plague just entered.

On the back of each rat token is a number and a group of symbols that determine who will die that turn. In the main, these symbols correspond to the character cards (e.g. if the token shows a witch's hat then the player with the Witch card loses a cube) but can also target the player with the most cubes, or just everyone. Importantly, tokens are only activated if the number of cubes matches or exceeds the number printed on the token. That is, the more cubes in the area, the more likely it is the token will claim some cubes. People familiar with Pompeii will find this very easy to pick up. The main difference being that in Pompeii you build up your population, and then deal death at the end. In Rattus, you build and deal death at the same time.

The nub of this game are the choices you have to make. Taking a character card gives you powers, but makes it more likely to lose cubes when the plague attacks. When placing cubes, you can put more cubes into an area with more rats, but again you are them more likely to lose them during the plague. These simple decisions drive the players and the game.

## Player interaction
Although it has been described somewhat as an area control crossed with a wargame, the interaction between players is quite limited. Players are constrained to moving the plague guy to a place where their opponents are, or distributing rat tokens in the same manner.

Having said that, it is quite common for a couple of players to form temporary truces in one area where they have many cubes, and keep the plague at the other end of the map. To overcome this, the other players have to form an alliance of their own.

And this could be seen as a good thing. Games with direct conflict can often turn nasty as the combat is very personal. Here, it is not one player killing another, but the impersonal plague. A small difference perhaps, but it does have an effect.

## Overall
Rattus is a quick, easy to learn family game that is both fun and rewards some sort of considered thought without being too difficult. Despite the theme it is very friendly, with the death and mayhem being abstracted out by the cubes and plague figure (plus the cubes don't get removed, they just go back to the player). The box recommends it for players 10+, but if they come from a gaming family I think many 6 year olds could handle this quite well.
